Yeah, so I'm going to do two small presentation because those are short talks and I didn't
want to take too much time today.
So we're going to speak about FFMPEG and mostly FFMPEG6.0, and then I will speak about
a new project called VLC.js, but it's a lie, it's not really VLC.js.
So who am I?
My name is Jean-Retier, some of you know me, some don't, so I'm president of Vidoran,
I've been working on VLC for, okay, I'm close to 40, so 17 years.
I've been involved in X264, which is a Vidoran project, David, which is a AV1 decoder and
lately a bit on FFMPEG, mostly on the community management, which is a funny topic.
I shouldn't be the one presenting this presentation, but the people who should do this presentation
are maybe in this room and don't want to present, so that's why I'm presenting.
Jokes aside, like if you look at the first time, open media room, like there is almost
no FFMPEG talk, which is completely insane.
VLCR is better, thanks to Kiran and Tourémy, but it's ridiculous.
If you look also in the archives, look in the archives, there's almost no FFMPEG, general
FFMPEG talk.
One, everything in the multimedia in the open source world and outside of the open source
world is actually based on FFMPEG.
And when I mean everything, I mean everything you see online, and most of those, like you
go to those big trade shows and they are all amazing cloud encoding, so on, and it's just
like a very nice whopper to FFMPEG.
And of course when I say FFMPEG, please understand, this is FFMPEG plus Libix264 plus Libix65
plus LibixBPX plus David plus all the other ex-vibes, all the libraries that I forget,
so, and even on our voici on Mademoiselle, like you know those French fashion thing
that we have, which is called Hacker News, even on Hacker News, like when there is a
release of FFMPEG, it's not even the top Hacker News, right?
So that means that we are doing something wrong,
which means we don't communicate enough on FFMPEG.
So here I am.
So the community is healthy.
We've had some fights in the past, to be honest.
The folks are long gone.
And most of the people working now on FFMPEG
also pops lots of new people who are not there
at the folk time, but also people from both folks
are still working on FFMPEG.
That's pretty cool, especially since we've not
seen that many open source community being
able to work together after those kind of events.
So here I'm just going to speak just quickly
about FFMPEG 5.0, which was around almost exactly
one year ago.
It was very important because we
tried to match the new release schedules that I'm
going to talk about.
But it's also that it was probably the biggest API
breakage ever on FFMPEG.
I think just a train of commerce removing deprecation
samples was around 130 commits.
And the diff was huge.
So some APIs were there deprecated to 2013
and were removed in 5.0.
So this is probably going to impact a lot of you
because a lot of distribution are still on 4.4.
But 5.0 is a big change of APIs.
And mostly one big thing is that it's
one API to decode both audio and video,
and not AV codec video, decode four, five, six,
and so on, all those APIs.
It's not doing subtitles yet, but I
was promised that someone will do it this year.
Where is Anton?
Yeah.
So and yeah, we did a lot of new things.
AV frame based API in SW scale, new bit fields streaming
filters, a lot of things to clean AV format and AV codec.
It's disentangling those two libraries,
working on the decoder context, et cetera.
You should look at the release notes on that.
There are some people who are doing amazing work, mostly
Andreas and James, who are basically removing
all the craft on FFMPEG.
So one day the whole FFMPEG will be thread safe.
We believe that, right?
And AV codec, any of the format will be completely split.
Yeah, OK, maybe not.
But there is a lot of work to be done,
and that's very important for security reasons.
Michael, who's still probably the oldest FFMPEG contributor,
is still like fuzzing FFMPEG every day.
Slice thread setting is W scale.
IMF digmixing, which is good because so many professionals
are using IMEF format, and they usually
do weird things on FFMPEG, or above FFMPEG,
and then we have to deal with their shit,
because it's wrongly marked.
So now we're actually getting that directly into FFMPEG.
Dolby vision, I'm not sure exactly which part of the vision,
because there is, as many of you know, a five or six profile.
But I think at least profile five were there.
And of course, a lot of things.
And one of the cool things was the integration of LiPlaCibo,
which used to be the MPV video filtering framework, mostly
GPU accelerated, that is now into FFMPEG.
And you can use that without GPU, easily with emulation.
So the old APIs, like you know the old APIs,
and now what's interesting is that it's more async-based,
and so you don't need to do those horrible weight.
5.1, so that was like six months ago in July.
This one is important for you, because it's an LTS.
5.0 is not LTS, so we're going to try to make that,
to fix at least the security bugs for a couple of years.
And most of the things that were added were a lot of features,
but one of the major API that was merged was the change
of the audio channel layout API, which
was supposed to come in 5.0, but we missed.
And then we said, well, it's going to take too much time.
So we did that with 5.1.
A lot of optimization on ARM in that release,
mostly on HVC decoding, a lot of things
on everyone decoding in hardware,
because there is still 25 different APIs
to do hardware acceleration.
But soon there will be a new one that
is going to replace all of them, which
is Vulkan video decoding, and we'll have a 14 standards.
JPEG Excel decoding, and a lot of things on SVTV1.
So yeah, the channel layout API was developed in 2013,
I think, by Vittorio.
I'm not sure he's around.
Yeah, Vittorio.
That was done during the fork, and it was quite complex.
But this is good, because it's ready to do what we called,
well, well, marketing calls NGA, which
is next generation audio, what marketing also
calls Dolby Atmos, those kind of object-based audio.
And the new channel layout API allows
to be a lot more flexible to custom layouts and weird things
without us having to do everything directly inside
FFMPEG.
So, and I'm still not starting about my main topic, which
is FFMPEG 6.0.
I hope when I was submitting the call that this would have
been tagged, and that's important.
I think this is even bigger in terms of a number of commits,
and mostly in terms of contributors,
because in the last six months, there
have been around 191 contributors.
That's huge, and that's a lot bigger than the previous release.
What is important?
There is not that many important API breakage and changes,
but there is new APIs.
And also, it's a major bump, so we
are going to remove more things that were deprecated
in the last few years, and that was like two new APIs
so that we didn't remove them in 5.0.
But we are going to remove that soon?
Soon.
One of the major changes is one of the most difficult thing
that we've seen is multishrouding the FFMPEG CLI.
So all those big guys are at YouTube and Vimeo and Facebook,
and all those providers of FFMPEG nice UIs are basically
one of the things they complained about
is lack of multishrouding and FFMPEG.
So they invent a lot of weird frameworks to do that,
so there is a lot of work to do that directly inside FFMPEG.
It's going to go on for the whole year, I think,
for all 2023, but that means that a lot of things
will be better for you to use.
And of course, when you do that, you
need to actually care about threat safety and clean up.
So that's a lot of cleanups.
What was done for 5.0 was that the mercs
are now in their own threads.
There will be more things.
There is now a risk 5 optimization, or at least
the framework to do that, inside FFMPEG.
One of the things that is important
is that you've probably seen that all the big guys building
GPUs have now shipped AV1 encoders.
So in 6.0, we've got Intel, N, NVIDIA, and AMD.
So you can actually encode AV1 in hardware.
And that's actually very fast.
You can reach 30 FPS in 1080p without any problem
with those cards.
And it's actually decent quality.
It's not as good as the SVT AV1, of course,
but it's pretty good.
There was a lot of work on the FFT code by Lynn.
She's over there.
She can tell you about that.
And I think it's like, I don't know how much faster it is,
but it's a lot faster.
So all the audio codecs and all the audio filters that
require the use of FFT and sometimes is better
than the external FFT libraries that everyone is using.
New API for record and structure frame
for encoders, API breakage for deprecation.
We have, of course, what I hate.
Lots of new YUV format and pixel format,
because there is always a good reason to add them.
And when I'm downstream as VLT, I hate that, but any.
Lots of things on channel layouts and H.274,
mostly about external filters.
One of the big parts on those features
is everything related to hardware.
So I said about everyone hardware recording,
a lot of pixel formats, especially for hardware.
There is finally the Android media
codec using directly NDK, and not with a Java crop that
is directly integrated into FFMPEG.
I think that requires API Android 23,
but I'm not exactly sure.
And we also have the encoding and not just the decoding,
but also based on media codec.
We have the Intel folks have done a lot of things
to have a 10-bit, 12-bit, 42444 VP9 decoding directly
inside FFMPEG.
That's one of the reasons why we have new pixel formats.
In terms of actual features, there
is, of course, lots of new codecs, lots of new filters.
The ones I prefer are the FTR, which
is a annoying company who doesn't want us to reverse engine
is that.
Bonk, APAC, there is a SIM SSIM 360 filter,
and some very cool bitstream filter for the DTS to PTS one.
Look at that one.
It's quite useful.
Yeah.
So FFMPEG CLI multistrading, as I said.
This is partly done in 6.0.
It will be continued on 6.1 and 7.0.
It is difficult, and it's long, but this
is going to improve all your lives, or at least especially
if you want to do a multiple HLS dash, multiple transcode,
multiple resolution, and do that directly,
without using third parties.
FFMPEG releases, this is a slide I took exactly
from a previous talk, and we never
talked about that during first time,
so that's why I'm talking about it.
The problem that was like FFMPEG releases were kind of,
well, before there was not.
So we all took the good show on, and I hope it was great.
And then we were seeing what Mplay was doing,
then VLC was copying.
And well, if Mplay on VLC agreed,
then everyone was using that.
Then we started having releases, and done by Michael,
and sometimes they were not very predictable.
So one of the idea is to start to come to a more predictable
fashion, which is one major API break,
and API break every year around December, January,
so we're in February, and we fuck this year.
But that's the idea.
So one major where we allow API and API breakage.
We remove APIs.
When it's deprecated, it must be there for two years
before we move that, but we will bump the SO numbers.
And then one or two releases during the year,
depending on security and what we need, so 5.0, 5.1.
And every two years, one of the dot one will be LTS,
and we'll continue that for two or three years.
So the plan was to do FFMPEG Cs.0 in January.
I hope it's going to come next week.
We'll see.
Yeah, this was not on schedule, so I'm adding a shorter talk
in the middle of my two talks.
David1.0 was released last year.
It is insane.
200,000 lines of handwritten assembly.
That's like, I don't think there is any open source project
that I've had.
I'm not sure there is even a non-open source project that
has that much assembly.
And yes, handwritten assembly is faster
than using whatever version of whatever compiler
and activating whatever amazing feature that is going
to auto vectorize something.
We still do 5, 8, 16 times faster than C,
so don't bring that up.
It is insane, yet it's necessary.
So when you decode everyone, so everyone
is now in all your iOS devices, all your Android devices,
all your applications that decode everyone.
It's on macOS, it's on Windows, it's of course in Chrome,
it's of course in VLCMPV and all the other things.
So it's literally everywhere.
A lot of work was done in the David 1.0 about frame-threading.
Like there is lots of, please see the talks from Ronaldo
for a few years ago.
Wow, OK, thank you.
About the different spreading models that are inside David,
and David 1.0 has everything in a simpler way.
We are going to, it's extremely fast, very fast.
David 1.0, 1.1 releases is coming soon, soonish.
A lot of fixing, especially because there
were a lot of conformance tests that we were not passing.
And for some reason, they got out.
And there is, of course, lots of new assembly, especially
for AVX 512 and Neon.
Cool.
We're going to speak about, well, I'm
going to do a demo, which is VLC.js, which is actually not
in JS.
So what are we talking about?
Yeah, so this is Chrome.
And this is why I'm on macOS and not my usual Linux
for the people who wonder.
This is VLC and FFMPag and all the dependency
compiled to WebAssembly.
And what you cannot see, but this
is doing hardware decodings through WebCodecs, right?
So what happens here is that what you're seeing
is that it's actually decoded on the hardware through WebCodecs.
And then you take the output frame
directly into WebGL and, well, OpenGL ES2, which
is compiled to WebGL, and display that.
And this is a 4K H264 MP4, blah, blah, blah.
OK, that's boring, JB.
I can do 4K H264 everywhere.
Sure, sure you can.
So let's do something a bit more complex.
So this is the same, probably a Divx.
Except it's MKV.
The MKV part is done in Wasm, right?
It's a normal VLC demuxer.
There is no JavaScript involved, right?
I'm not demuxing MKV and remixing as MP4, like HLDS.js.
It has, of course, chapter support,
because, well, what's the use of that?
But also, if I found my mouse again, no worries.
Yeah, you have also chapter subtitles,
which are not WebVTT, right?
Normal DVB subtitles.
OK, so that's not too amazing, right?
So let's do something more complex.
OK, 4K VP9 in software decoding directly
inside the web browser.
OK, that's pretty much better, right?
WebM on macOS, right?
So, well, yeah, but professional.
They use, like, actual format, like MPEG-TS.
Let's do.
So that's something that is ATSC over the air, right?
So that's HEVC83TS, right?
All the stack that is not in the web browser.
It's decoded and displayed directly into your web browser.
And that's where you realize that the US TV is really dumb.
OK, but, OK, so that was hardware accelerated or not,
because that's why it's HEVC.
As you can guess, right?
I can either force web codec or AV codec.
So now I'm going to force software decoding.
And I'm going to show you something a bit more complex,
which is this is Korean TV, which is interlaced.
And the interlacing is happening as a WebGL shader
directly inside your web browser, right?
So we're decoding 8264 interlaced.
Of course, we cannot do that by hardware,
because, of course, API doesn't support interlaced codec.
So we decode full in software, and then we display directly
and do sharpening and the interlacing
of those very old multicast formats without any change.
OK, and I guess I got no.
Yeah, I got one minute more.
So this is DNECHD.
Of course, the output is not 420, but it's 420, 422.
And that's actually interlaced and decoded as MXF directly.
All those professional formats, you play that directly
inside the web browser.
So of course, if we can do 422 and down sampling for 420
in software, well, on the GPU, I can also do 444.
So this is YUV444, 10-bit, right?
Of course, BBB, right?
But things that are absolutely not
possible with any type of APIs.
I probably also can show you that we can do other filters.
And this is a 360 movie that we have with the support on VLC.
And of course, all the mapping from Tetidal to Equial Drunk
Duo is done on the GPU.
Of course, that means that everything
that we do with LiPlasibo in theory should get in.
And I'm out of time.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Do we have any questions from the room?
So an eight question.
So you said you have 200,000 lines of specialized code.
So perhaps there is no slowdown when you flip or rotate
the image or do such transforms.
Because you have a specialized version for that.
Is it so?
You mean on David?
Or here?
Oh, sorry.
I cannot differentiate.
So on David, it's really the decoding part, right?
David is 200,000 lines of assembly
just to do the decoding.
It's around 35,000 lines per architecture.
And we do lots of architectures.
And then they give you a decoding surface.
And then we use it in VLC, in PV, in FFMPag, and we do things.
And here, we would compile it directly
inside WebAssembly, run that in the web browser.
And all the transformations are done then on WebGL.
So that doesn't change anything.
Just to know whether there is a slowdown of any amount
just because of those common transforms, you say?
No, that shouldn't be.
On the dark question?
Can you compile assembly to WebAssembly assembly?
Like, could you compile David in the WebAssembly?
Are you hungry for WebAssembly?
So one of the things that we tried with Lynn, again,
was what we call an assembly transpiler,
where you take actually the ARM handwritten assembly
and try to transpire that to webassembly.scmd, right?
So that you could use neon and do exactly
the opposite of what the web browser are actually doing,
where they take the wasm assembly
and compile that just in time for neon and so on.
It's a very insane project that I had the idea a few years ago.
It's really not sure whether we are going
to be able to do that because you're transpiling assembly.
Like, what the fuck are you talking about?
But yes, I think that's the right solution instead
of rewriting, again, all the assembly from FFMPag
and David again.
If you have time, please come and help us.
I might actually find also some money for that,
if people care.
Another question?
Please ask questions.
I don't eat people.
Yes?
Last time I checked, compiling straight into web assembly,
everything that was thread, posix, everything
was pretty not yet finalized.
Like, what is the process for compiling?
It works fine.
But that's also why you see that I'm on macOS, right?
And I'm on Chrome and not displaying my usual Firefox
and Linux because in order to have threads,
you need to have what we call shared array objects, which
is basically common things.
And because in the web world, what they call web work,
it's usually serialization and deserialization
to move data.
Now this is almost done, works everywhere, mostly on Chrome.
Now it works on Safari.
It works on Firefox, but it's buggy.
And also one of the things that is annoying
is the off-screen canvas because you
want to be able to read directly in the back buffer
before displaying it.
That doesn't work anywhere correctly.
And finally, the hardware decoder only
works in web in Chrome for now.
But maybe Firefox will do something, won't it?
Sorry, what's the concept of the payload
that the pages to download to get that?
25 megawatts?
So the idea is that we're going to, like,
VLC is a module approach.
So there is a very small core and 400, 500, 600 now,
maybe, modules.
And so what I want is to actually be able to load.
And that's almost working, in theory,
so you can load a shadow object.
So you would only stream the core,
and then the core will know which one to go and download.
Yes, Steve?
You mentioned that there were big patches for FNPEG
to organize the code.
It's easier to read emails, so when you flip them.
I'm not answering that question.
Thank you.
So the question was, when is FNPEG community
moving to a sane thing, which is GitLab?
Not my short, right?
Like, you know my opinion, right?
Videolan, VLC, all the iOS, Android ports, X264, and so on.
Even David is on GitLab, and we like it.
The FNPEG community prefers to stay on email.
So I think it's a mistake because we are
losing too many patches because it's very difficult to,
like, but that's a community opinion,
and the community is a majority.
Last question.
So if you're rendering in OpenGL or in the VLCJS,
you're bypassing the media engine, right?
So how do you do the audio-video synchronization?
Well, of course we are.
So the answer is, like, how are you
doing audio-video synchronization?
Well, like VLC, right?
Like, the core of VLC.
VLC was done by this guy and other guys
to actually do, like, live TV, right?
So the core of VLC is a clock, and the clock
is basically working on doing, like,
synchronization, audio and video,
and resampling the audio when it's too late, and so on.
So here we are doing exactly that, right?
So we output audio with Web Audio.
Well, no.
A small part of Web Audio called Audio Worklets.
And so we know how much is actually being played back,
and then we control the V out, which is basically the core of VLC
to synchronize audio and video, and we're using that there.
But I'm not using any type of media source extension
or any other open media, blah, blah, blah.
We are really like, it's mostly a video game.
OK.
